---
layout: default
title: Related Work
nav_order: 2
has_children: false
permalink: /docs/related_work
---

# Related Work

---

## Previous Work
Due to the success of deep learning in extracting meaningful features and learning from raw data, researchers have developed and evaluated various models for garbage classification and segmentation. In recent studies, experts tested popular deep learning models using the Trashnet dataset to categorize garbage images [1]. Through the use of optimization methods like Adam and Adadelta, as well as data augmentation techniques, they found that DenseNet121 achieved the best results with a test accuracy rate of 95%. The unique properties of the DenseNet architecture, such as dense connectivity, facilitate information flow, gradient propagation, feature reuse, and parameter efficiency. These characteristics contribute to DenseNet's ability to identify complex patterns and achieve high classification accuracy.

While neural network models have made remarkable progress in garbage classification, research on garbage segmentation is relatively unexplored. In a recent study, researchers applied the deep supervision UNet++ model to address this issue, specifically focusing on road garbage classification and segmentation [10]. This improved model incorporates nested, dense skip pathways to enhance feature propagation and network performance. By training the model on a road garbage segmentation dataset consisting of four categories (stones, leaves, sand, and bottles), significant improvement in garbage segmentation was achieved with a Mean Intersection over Union (MIoU) score of 0.7673. However, the model's real-time performance is limited despite its high accuracy.

In addition to the lack of emphasis on real-time garbage segmentation research, another limitation is the number of garbage types considered in real-world scenarios. To optimize recycling processes, it is crucial to sort waste into groups that undergo similar recycling treatments. Most existing datasets categorize waste into a limited number of classes, typically 2 to 6 categories at most. For example, the Trashnet dataset includes paper, glass, trash, metal, plastic, and cardboard categories [1]. Enhancing the ability to classify waste into a greater number of classes would significantly improve waste management.

## Models for Our Work
The Grounding DINO architecture [11] to perform Zero-Shot Object Detection on our dataset consisting of 12 distinct garbage categories [11]. Grounding DINO integrates image and text data through a process that involves extracting features using a text backbone and an image backbone. These initial features are then enhanced via a feature enhancer for cross-modality feature fusion, using deformable self-attention for image features and regular self-attention for text features. A language-guided query selection module is then applied to select features most relevant to the input text for guiding object detection. Finally, a cross-modality decoder combines image and text modality features through a layered process that includes self-attention, image cross-attention, text cross-attention, and feed-forward neural network (FFN) layers, with an extra text cross-attention layer added to improve modality alignment. Grounding DINO demonstrates exceptional performance in detecting objects, even when encountering objects that are not part of the predefined classes in the training data. This adaptability allows the model to handle novel objects and scenarios, making it highly versatile and suitable for subsequent garbage segmentation tasks.

The Segment Anything Model (SAM) [9] consists of an image encoder to generate one-time image embeddings, a prompt encoder that embeds the prompts, and a lightweight mask decoder that combines the embeddings from the prompt and image encoders. SAM presents a notable advantage by isolating each individual piece of garbage. This isolation in the data preprocessing stage ensures a more precise classification and segmentation in the model training phase.

For the downstream semantic segmentation task, we employed DeepLabv3 [2], a model recognized for its exceptional performance in semantic segmentation. DeepLabv3 incorporates dilated convolutions and atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP) to capture multi-scale context. It expands the receptive field of filters using dilated convolutions, enabling the model to process a larger context without escalating computational complexity. Each unit in the output of this layer is a weighted sum of all units in the corresponding location across all input channels, which can be thought of as integrating the multi-scale context information. As a result, it provides a finer segmentation result by considering the context of the objects, allowing it to distinguish garbage from the surroundings accurately.

ResNet50 [5] and MobileNetV3 [6] are the backbones we experimented with for our real-time garbage segmentation task. ResNet50, which is a variant of the Residual Networks, is known for its depth, reliability, and performance. It includes 50 layers and introduces the concept of residual learning to allow for deeper networks without the drawbacks of vanishing gradients. It typically provides high accuracy in image classification tasks, but it's computationally expensive and requires substantial resources, which makes it less suitable for mobile or embedded applications. On the other hand, MobileNetV3, an evolution of the MobileNet architecture, is designed for mobile and edge devices. It is more lightweight and efficient compared to ResNet50, making it ideal for devices with limited computational resources. MobileNetV3 employs techniques such as depthwise separable convolutions and neural architecture search, which optimizes both the accuracy and computational requirements. While it may not reach the same accuracy levels as ResNet50 for some tasks, it significantly reduces the model size and computational load.
